
# Reframing active travel interventions as safety interventions

<!-- an exploration of the relationship between different interventions, uptake and casualty rates in the UK -->

Fear of unsafe roads and motor traffic are reported to be the main
barriers to cycling in cities in the UK and internationally, implying
that reducing road danger could be an effective strategy enabling
cycling uptake (Aldred et al. 2017; Brown, Moodie, and Carter 2017).
Road safety interventions can be framed as active travel interventions.
On the other hand, a co-benefit of active travel interventions is that
they will make the road safer (Heinen et al. 2017; Mulvaney et al.
2015), suggesting that at least some types of active travel
interventions can be seen as road safety interventions. Road safety and
active travel can thus be seen as two sides of the same coin.

Given the urgency of the epidemic of ‘road violence,’ which kills around
1.3 million people each year and is the leading cause of death among
young people worldwide according to the World Health Organization (World
Health Organization 2018), this paper posits that framing active travel
interventions as public safety interventions may be advantageous from
the perspective of vital public support for change. Motivated by these
premises, and recalling that road safety played a major role in
political shifts favouring cycling the nation with highest mode share of
cycling worldwide (The Netherlands), we analysed a range of pro-cycling
interventions from road safety *and* cycling uptake perspectives. Using
data on cycling investment from government reports and open data from
OpenStreetMap, we assess the extent to which new cycleways and other
pro-cycling measures are associated with reduced crash rates according
to the open access ‘STATS19’ dataset (2014-2019). We hypothesise that
new cycleways alone are not associated with safer roads for all modes,
but that places with additional ‘low traffic neighbourhood’ type
interventions such as ‘filtered permeability’ and reduced speed limits
will see substantial reductions in crash rates for both pedestrians and
cyclists. Our findings provide a (still evolving) evidence base on which
policy-relevant debates about the framing of active travel and road
safety interventions can build.

# Summary

Fear of unsafe roads and motor traffic are reported to be a major
barriers to cycling in many places, implying that reducing road danger
could be an effective strategy enabling cycling uptake. Road safety
interventions can be framed as active travel interventions. On the other
hand, a co-benefit of active travel interventions is that they will make
the road safer. At least some types of active travel interventions can
be seen as road safety interventions. Based on these observations and
analysis of data from UK cities, this presentation makes the case for
reframing active travel interventions as public safety interventions.

# Quote

Road traffic injury is now the leading cause of death for children and
young adults aged 5–29 years (WHO 2018).

# Media

<https://twitter.com/robinlovelace>

# References

<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body hanging-indent">

<div id="ref-aldred_cycling_2017" class="csl-entry">

Aldred, Rachel, Bridget Elliott, James Woodcock, and Anna Goodman. 2017.
“Cycling Provision Separated from Motor Traffic: A Systematic Review
Exploring Whether Stated Preferences Vary by Gender and Age.” *Transport
Reviews* 37 (1): 29–55. <https://doi.org/10.1080/01441647.2016.1200156>.

</div>

<div id="ref-brown_evidence_2017" class="csl-entry">

Brown, V., M. Moodie, and R. Carter. 2017. “Evidence for Associations
Between Traffic Calming and Safety and Active Transport or Obesity: A
Scoping Review.” *Journal of Transport & Health* 7: 23–37.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jth.2017.02.011>.

</div>

<div id="ref-heinen_does_2017" class="csl-entry">

Heinen, Eva, Amelia Harshfield, Jenna Panter, Roger Mackett, and David
Ogilvie. 2017. “Does Exposure to New Transport Infrastructure Result in
Modal Shifts? Patterns of Change in Commute Mode Choices in a Four-Year
Quasi-Experimental Cohort Study.” *Journal of Transport & Health* 6
(Supplement C): 396–410. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jth.2017.07.009>.

</div>

<div id="ref-mulvaney_cycling_2015" class="csl-entry">

Mulvaney, Caroline A., Sherie Smith, Michael C. Watson, John Parkin,
Carol Coupland, Philip Miller, Denise Kendrick, and Hugh McClintock.
2015. “Cycling Infrastructure for Reducing Cycling Injuries in
Cyclists.” *Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews*, no. 12.
<https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD010415.pub2>.

</div>

<div id="ref-worldhealthorganization_global_2018" class="csl-entry">

World Health Organization. 2018. *Global Status Report On Road Safety
2018*. S.l.

</div>

</div>
